Do you know that the per capita
income of Gujarat is five times more than that of Bihar? West
Bengal, which was once the third largest economy of our country, is
not even in the top five today. Punjab and
Haryana are two states whose capital is the same but
whose economic story is very different.
Prime Minister Modi has an economic
advisory council. In September 2024,
they released a report, which did
not get much attention. This report is very interesting
because it talks about which states are
doing well in our country and which are
not. This video has four rounds.
In the first round, we will talk about Maharashtra and
Bihar. In the second round, we will talk about
Gujarat and Bengal. In the third round, Punjab
and Haryana. In the fourth round, Uttar
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. And in the last, I will talk
about two states from which we
all should learn. Now why am I talking about this
because
Arnab Goswami is busy right now and the
dirty perverted voters are laughing away
like idiots through it. So I thought I should take the
responsibility to tell our politicians
that Bhaiya Zindagi  Is it necessary?
So first of all let's talk about
one of the richest and one of the poorest
states of the country. Just like every country has a GDP,
similarly every state has an NSDP.
Maharashtra's NSDP is the highest in our country.
13% of the country's GDP
comes from Maharashtra and if Maharashtra
were a country of its own, it would be the 40th
largest economy of the world. Whereas if we
talk about Bihar, Bihar's
contribution in our country's GDP is
not even 3. Now I am talking about NSDP,
but we can also talk about per capita, but
on the basis of per capita, Bihar is at the
bottom in our country. Its per
capita income of ₹5000000 is even less than Somalia. If
you go back 60 years ago, the situation was not so
bad. Bihar's contribution
in our GDP was 8%, which today has come down to just 3%, so
what has Maharashtra
done that Bihar has not done?
A major credit for Maharashtra's growth goes to
Mumbai which is our  It is the financial capital of the country. In
fact, 20% of Maharashtra's
GDP comes from Mumbai alone. But there are
many political decisions behind Maharashtra's success
which were taken by its politicians
many years ago. For example, Maharashtra became one of the
first states of our country where
agricultural cooperative societies developed. The
government there made it easy for these cooperatives to get bank
loans, due to which these
corporates were able to build mills, dairy and processing
plants. Similarly, during 1950, the
farmers of Western Maharashtra
united their resources and built sugar factories
and today Maharashtra is the biggest contributor to the country's sugar production.
We saw similar things in industries as well. For example,
in 1962, Maharashtra Industrial
Development Corporation body was formed, through which
companies could start working immediately
without the hassle of roads, electricity and water.
Maharashtra got the benefit of this.
After 1991, when the country's economy was liberalized, it
became a leading industrial state in 1994. Today
Maharashtra is a manufacturing powerhouse
where many cities have developed their own industries.  For
example, if Mumbai is the financial
capital, Pune is called the
Detroit of the East.
Maharashtra is
also a leader in pharmaceuticals because of its automobile industry. There are
big pharma companies in Mumbai, Pune, Nashik and Aurangabad.
Including Serum
Institute of India, which is the world's
largest vaccine manufacturer,
Maharashtra was at the second spot in the ranking of most industries till 2017, but Gujarat
left them behind. In the last 60 years,
Maharashtra's contribution to the country's
GDP has been consistently around 13%.
Whereas if we talk about Bihar, the
story there is very different. Bihar is literally a failed
state which is in deep trouble. Recently,
Jan Swaraj leader Prashant Kishore had said
about Bihar. Bihar's reputation has become
so bad that the countrymen
discriminate against their own people. The
name of Bihar only brings to people's minds jungle
raj and BIMARU state. But
what is the reason behind Bihar's economic problems? The main reason is that the industry has not developed
there. The main reason for
Bihar's economy is that the industry has not developed there.  Only 18%
contribution comes from industry There are
only five states and union territories in the country
where the contribution of industry is
less than 18% Guess which one Andaman Nicobar
Manipur Nagaland Delhi and Chandigarh Now you
yourself must have understood
what is the condition of industry in Bihar where
Maharashtra was focusing on industry,
factories were shutting down in Bihar
before 1950 actually sugar
production was done to a great extent in Bihar
more than half of the sugar factories of the country were
in Bihar the number which used to be 29 55 years ago what is it
now 9 either the government has
usurped the factory or the
factory has shut down due to scam or extortion and
I am not just talking about sugar factories for example take the
example of Madhaura
just 80 kms from Patna once upon a time there was a
lot of jobs and investment in this city people from every corner of Bihar used to
come here in search of jobs and a very
famous chocolate brand Mertens had a
factory here and what is the condition of this factory today
you yourself can see  Just
look, this area is made into the grave yard of factories; to
put it in Hindi, it is a place where
factories are buried; and not just here,
if you go to Muzaffarpur, Nawada and Kishanganj,
you will find many such empty factories there too.
Now look, the poverty of Bihar did
not start yesterday or the day before yesterday; its seeds were sown in the 18th century
when the British
implemented the Zamindari System; after that, in 1952, the
Government of India charted the Freight Equalization Policy
and both these policies
broke the back of Bihar's economy; now I will not
go into much detail; if you
want details, you will find the links of the research paper
in the description; apart from this, the
Government of India also did not give that much support to Bihar; from
1951 to 2012, UP and
Bihar got the lowest allocation in the entire country for
development on a per capita basis,
whereas during these 60 years, Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Haryana
got double the per capita allocation; now Bihar was poorer than Bihar and UP
and the Central Government did
not give any support either; now without external
support, Bihar could not develop its  How to improve the government
and if you go back 100 years, the
statistics have definitely changed
but not the story. In 1930, there was one police officer for
every 800 people in Bombay Presidency,
whereas in Bihar there was
just one police officer for every 2300 people.
And if we talk about the last 30-40 years,
caste politics entered the politics of Bihar
and Bihar's poverty also got
linked to caste. Before 1980, there were
no big caste based political leaders in Bihar. This
changed because of the entry of two people. If Lalu
Prasad Yadav is not a human being, then
who will ring the bell in the temple. If he is not a human being, then who will go to
pray in the mosque. And the
people of this country will not lag behind in the struggle that Nitish Kumar will fight for the protection of democracy.
Both the OBC leaders
wanted to shake the upper caste dominated politics of Bihar. In
fact, what was the slogan of Lalu Prasad Yadav? We do
n't want development, we want respect. Now Lalu
Prasad Yadav definitely
gave political power to the weaker communities, but
in the pursuit of social development, he forgot the economic development of
Bihar.  In work based politics, only this
matters that which goon is controlling the police station, is
he from my community,
if yes then life is fine but if by chance the
government changes and the goon is also from the police station then my
life changes, everybody is paying attention to the community of the goon
but nobody thought
that your police station is controlled by a goon.
By the 21st century
Nitish Kumar came with great hope,
he tried to make many changes, some were
successful and some were not, like in 2006
he introduced a new industrial policy
and promised businesses
that he will give them subsidies, now the government did
make the promise but the companies did
not get the subsidies, due to this many companies
went to court against the government, in 2015 again there is a new
industrial policy but what was the problem in this that there was a
post production policy, that
means companies will have to set up the factory first
and then they will get the subsidy,
now you tell me which business owner will
take subsidy after setting up the factory
that too in a place like Bihar where there is no guarantee
that the government will even give money or
No, now look, one problem has definitely been solved. The
central government actually
helps Bihar a lot, but in terms of per capita
Bihar is one of the highest states that
gets financial help
from the central government. So now the politicians of Bihar will have to
decide what they will do with that money. There
is a problem in Bihar's
economy that agriculture still has a
lot of dominance, where agriculture
contributes 20 to 25 percent to Bihar's GDP,
but about 60 percent people are still working in this sector,
which basically means
that a lot of people are
evolved in agriculture in Bihar. That's why they will have to
focus on other sectors, what Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu have done, for that
they will have to build better schools and pay
attention to infrastructure. Look,
I talked about this at a very high level, but the
problem is that no one trusts the Bihar government
because they do
not have accountability, they are
not able to deliver results. That's why any
entrepreneur thinks that why should I
invest in Bihar when  There is no guarantee
that the government will help me or not and
this trust deficit is very
important and to overcome this trust deficit, the
Bihar government will have to
actually deliver results.
They will have to take action on the policies they make.
Only then will the problem be solved
because as this Makhana trader said,
investors need confidence and
right now the Bihar government lacks confidence.
Now let's come to the second round of Gujarat and
West Bengal. About 60 years ago, Gujarat was
not even a state. Gujarat
was a part of the Bombay Presidency and at that time Gujarat was
nowhere in the top five states. Whereas if we
talk about Bengal, it was the third
largest economy of the country, double that of Gujarat.
And if we talk about the last 60-70 years, the situation has
reversed. So what happened that the
economy of Gujarat grew so much and
not that of Bengal? Like Maharashtra, Gujarat
focused on industries after independence
due to which many large industries like
power, cement and fertilizers were set up there in
1962.  In 1991, Gujarat Industrial
Development Corporation was formed due to which many
major industrial hubs were established in Vapi,
Ankleshwar and Vadodara. And
after the liberalization of 1991, Gujarat also did what
Maharashtra did. In 1995,
they made a new industrial policy
Gujarat 2018 and Beyond which
gave many incentives to the companies. To promote industrial growth,
Gujarat
also focused on public private partnerships for
infrastructure. For example, Gujarat
Maritime Board was formed so that private
companies could invest in small ports
and logistics would be cheap.
Due to the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act,
companies were able to invest in roads, power and industrial
infrastructure.
Due to this, highways were built in Gujarat and electricity came,
due to which doing business became easier.
This private sector friendly environment
accelerated when Narendra Modi
became the Chief Minister of Gujarat. Narendra Damodar
Das Modi and today whether it is chemicals or
textile manufacturing, Gujarat is one of the
most attractive states for
investments. This is why in
terms of industries.  In 2008, Gujarat has
left Maharashtra behind, but
why Bengal could not do this is
Ratan Tata's statement that we do not want to come to an
area where we serve that we are unwanted. A
huge protest was going on against Tata in Singur area of ​​Hooghly district of West Bengal.
In 2006, Tata Motors had decided that they would
build a car manufacturing plant in Bengal. Their car Tata was not cheap. The chief
minister was Buddhadev Bhattacharya
who, after sinking Bengal's economy for many years,
decided that he
wanted to make Bengal an industrial hub. Now
farmers were given compensation for the land,
but many farmers did not accept it,
that's why they started a protest and
a young political leader Mamta Banerjee
supported this protest. Ultimately,
Ratan ji said goodbye to Tata and he
left Bengal and went to Gujarat. The Bengal government not only
lost a project worth 500 crores, but also had to
pay 50 crores to Tata because
they had incurred a loss because of them. And this
is a small example of Bengal's industrial
About the story At the time of independence, Bombay,
Kolkata and Madras were the industrial
hubs of the country. Due to this, Maharashtra,
Bengal and Tamil Nadu became the economic centers of the country.
In 1955, Bengal had 24% of industrial
production and 27% of industrial jobs in the country.
After 50 years, these numbers have become 4%
and 5%. Just like Bihar, there are
many reasons behind the industrial decline in Bengal. For
many years, the jute
industry in Bengal was a major industry, but
due to the partition, this industry seems to have collapsed.
Within 5 years, the big
jute mills in Kolkata were closed because the
supply of raw jute came from India.
After this, the wars of 1965 and 1971 took place. On the
16th of December
1971, the Indian Armed Forces brought the
dictators to their knees and gave Bengal
freedom. Now, due to these wars, the Indian government
stopped investing in railways
and this had a huge impact on the economy of Bengal
because Bengal's  The economy now
depended on engineering industries
and these industries
needed investment from railways but because the
Indian government reduced investment in railways,
this
affected the economy of Bengal. Apart from this, the
Bengal government also did many own goals.
First of all, the
Communist Party dominated the politics of Bengal,
after which gradually the industries started closing down and
this happened because of strikes and lockouts.
Strikes happen when workers
refuse to work and lockouts
happen when the company refuses to get the work done.
This was the time when the Bengal
Communist Party had huge support
from trade unions and industrial labour. And
that is why the Bengal government said that if there is ever a
fight between the company and the workers, then the
police cannot support the company. So the
company thought that what is the benefit of investing in Bengal,
so they went to another state.
In 1977, Jyoti
Basu's Left Front government came to power in Bengal. The
Left Front government ruled Bengal for
34 years, due to which it was called the
Democratic Elected Left
Serving Left.  The government formed all over the world
gave priority to small industries, not the big corporations and
foreign multinational companies. Right now, small
local industries could provide jobs, but
they could never make good products
because they did not have the technology.
And after that, the liberalization of 1991 came for
building an India free from the fear of
war and exploitation. India is not the
move again, we shall make the future happen. In 1994, the
Left government woke up after many years and said that
now we
need investment in Bengal. Chief Minister Jyoti
Basu also visited many capitalist countries to
attract investors. Therefore, between 1991 and 2006,
many new industries came up in Bengal, but the
issue was that Bengal's infrastructure was
very poor. The government never focused on those things.
Now, if you wake up after 10-20 years and think
that you need investment, then you will
not set up a company because of that.
Apart from that, it was very difficult to acquire land or
buy land, like we did with Tata.  For
example, we saw no one come to a
halt last evening. Protesters tried to
block a factory gate to prevent Tata
Motors employees from leaving. Mamata Banerjee
insisted that she is not in favour of violence but
is not responsible for individual actions.
Then, when Mamata Banerjee became the Chief Minister, the
party symbol changed but
not the problems. For example, the manufacturing sector in Bengal is
still very unorganized and
that is why Bengal still lags behind
other states like Maharashtra, Gujarat,
Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh in terms of industry.
Now, to fix its economy,
Bengal will have to do many things
including investing in infrastructure. At
present, infrastructure investment in Bengal is very low compared to other manufacturing and service-
driven states. For
example, to build industrial corridors,
Bengal can take inspiration from Sanand Industrial State of Gujarat
and Sri City Corridor of Andhra Pradesh.
These corridors
provide reliable water and electricity and efficient
logistics.  And the cost of doing business is
reduced and taking such decisions will
not change the image of Bengal and image
matters. Right now Bengal is
not considered an industrial friendly state in our country
and to change this image Bengal will have to take
many decisions. Now we come to our
third round, Haryana vs Punjab. These
two states are side by side but their
stories are very different. Like Gujarat,
after independence, the state of Haryana did
not even exist
and after partition, there was a
lot of anger among the people in the area of ​​Haryana due to two reasons.
They used to say that there is
not much development in Hindi speaking areas.
Therefore Chaudhary Manfool Singh launched a movement
and said that
why so much preference is being given to Punjabi speaking areas.
Finally, on 1 November 1966, Punjab was divided into three
states Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh. In
fact, when Haryana
became a state, many people were
not optimistic about Haryana. In fact, Haryana was
called the poor brother of Punjab, but
after a few years the situation changed and
in 2010, Haryana took over Punjab.  So this is
how it happened.
Just a year before the formation of Haryana, India saw two famines.
Due to this, the production of grains
fell by 20%. During the crisis, Indian
scientist MS Swaminathan,
along with a Mexican scientist, tried
seeds of high-yielding varieties of grains in India.
With this, the
Green Revolution started in India. But these new
seeds needed a lot of water and they were
introduced in those states where the
irrigation system was good, like Punjab and
Haryana. And this became a turning point for Haryana.
Because of the Green Revolution,
Haryana, which once had no agricultural
productivity, was now
growing grains for the whole country. And a country which once
had to rely on the ship loads which arrived from
the USA, thanks to the Green Revolution, could now boast
of surplus food grains. The same
revolution was seen in the milk industry as well.
In 1970, Operation Flood was started.
Its aim was to flood the country with milk.
Cooperatives were formed with dairy farmers
and they were given modern resources.  And
training was given. Haryana became the first state to
adopt this. Now whether it is
milk, eggs or wheat, Haryana has
become a big agricultural hub. Now this was
happening in Punjab as well. But one thing that
Haryana did and which Punjab did not do is
that Haryana
also focused on industry and services. There was a time when industries were
only in Ambala in Haryana, but then
because of Maruti-Suzuki, businesses wanted to come there. And the
tax income that Haryana earned from these businesses was
used by Haryana to develop its infrastructure.
Today Gurugram in Haryana is an IT
powerhouse. In 2015 itself, more than 500
IT companies had come there. It
should not be so surprising that it was a well-known
economics that Punjab does
not want to accept its crisis. Which crisis?
Punjab's financial crisis. RBI has
clearly said in its report that
Punjab is in a financial crisis.
I had made a detailed video about this,
which you can watch after this video, but
I will tell you later.  I am surprised, the main argument is that the
debt on Punjab in 2022 is
four times more than its annual revenue.
This crisis has not only ruined the finances of the Punjab government
but has
also dashed the hopes of the people. You will
not believe that the first promise that the Aam Aadmi Party
government fulfilled in Punjab was that
they introduced a Volvo bus
from Jalandhar to the airport. The government is also saying
that brother, for your future,
it is better that you move out of the state. And this
crisis was not introduced a week or two ago,
but was introduced many years ago. The
Punjab government's own
report says that Punjab's debt
indicators are probably the worst in the entire country.
You remember the Green Revolution, the same
revolution that changed the agriculture of our country, the
same sowed the seeds for Punjab's
financial crisis because these
high-yielding varieties of seeds were
introduced. Their water
requirement was high. That is why Punjab
's canal irrigation system was not used
for water.  This was not enough, so farmers started using tube wells and
pump sets to draw water from the ground.
Now farmers were drawing so much water
from the ground that the water supply got depleted. Now when the water supply got
depleted, they had to install bigger pump sets
and because of the bigger pump sets, their
electricity cost increased.
So many farmers started an Indian Farmers
Union to ask for help from the government.
Their demand was that brother,
forgive our electricity bill. We have to install such big
pump sets and we do
n't have to pay these electricity bills. Apart from this, the Khalistan
movement started
and an insurgent movement started.
Because of these challenges, no
government in Punjab wanted to do anything against the farmers.
Finally, the Congress government agreed that
they would fulfill this demand but they did
not realize that by accepting this demand,
they were introducing an addiction in the entire state
and it is
not so easy to get out of this addiction. An old
report says that the 1990 elections were being
won only in the name of subsidies. The Punjab
government now spends so much money on electricity subsidy
that they no longer have any
money left for doing other things.
United Cycles and Parts
Manufacturers Association President
KDS Chawla says that importers do not
want to come to Punjab because we do not have air
connectivity. Volta says that
you should come to New Delhi to meet them. The result is
that Punjab has come from one of the top states to the
bottom position, Haryana has
reached the top from the bottom. Look, the
solution is clear for Punjab. They will now have to take tough decisions.
They will have to tell the farmers that
you cannot grow rice and wheat. On the contrary,
they will have to give incentives to farmers to
grow other crops because the
electricity subsidies being given are
not sustainable. And look,
I am not saying anything new. The same thing was
said by agricultural economist SS Joll 25 years ago. For
many years, the Punjab government has been digging a pit
or it is going down. They do
not realize that
someone will have to pay for this digging. Now
either this money will be paid by the current generation of Punjab
or the future generation. Punjab has to decide this.
In our fourth round, Uttar Pradesh versus Tamil Nadu,
a small boy was
born in a city of Tamil Nadu in 1903. His name was
Kamaraj. In his childhood, he used to go to a
small school for his studies. But at a very young
age, that boy witnessed a tragedy when
his father died due to which
he had to leave school to
earn money for the family. And you know
what the school dropout did 40 years later.
He became the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and the school
dropout changed the education sector of Tamil Nadu
when K Kamaraj became the Chief Minister.
In 1954, the literacy rate of Tamil Nadu was just
19 and after about 10 years, this literacy
rate increased to 36. One major reason behind this was
that K Kamaraj introduced midday meals
in schools due to which
many poor families no longer wanted to send their children to schools.
But this one policy decision had
an impact on the education and health sector of Tamil Nadu. Even today, if you
look at the impact report, the students of Tamil Nadu are
much better in reading and maths than other states.  In health care
too, the Tamil Nadu government has
invested in hospitals and primary health centres
and we can now see the impact of all this
in manufacturing.
Apart from Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu is also the
country's automobile hub. Hyundai and Honda have
set up their plants. Now
manufacturing is happening in many other states,
but the unique thing about Tamil Nadu is
that there are many women in their workforce.
Half of the female
factory workers in our country are in Tamil Nadu itself, where
in Maharashtra 12% and in Gujarat 7% of the
factory workforce is female. This number is
40% for Tamil Nadu. One
major reason behind this is that in the year 2000, the Madras High
Court passed a ruling that women
can also work night shifts in factories.
Because of this, when you see the photos of today's
Tamil Nadu factories, you will see that
women are making the country's iPhones. This is why the
manufacturing story of our country today is being
written by the women of Tamil Nadu. Now,
in Tamil Nadu, the focus has been on health and education for about 70 years.  The
story in Uttar Pradesh is very different. Backwards should get
60 out of 100. This was a quote of Ram Manhar
Lohia who used to say in Uttar Pradesh that
backward society should get representation at 60%.
But just like Bihar,
politics in Uttar Pradesh was
not about health or education but
about caste. In Uttar Pradesh, caste
decided who had land, who
got jobs and who got proper education. This is
why in 1950, the literacy rate in Uttar Pradesh was
just 12 while the country's average was 18.
We could not fix the education sector even for 40 years.
We were spending money but on the
wrong things. In 1990, 90% of the elementary
education budget went to teachers' salaries and
pensions. Now there is no problem in this. The
problem is that those teachers were
not even working. On the contrary, these teachers had become
very strong politically.
In Uttar Pradesh, in fact, these teachers
also got guaranteed representation in the state.
In the Legislative Council, yes, in 1970,
₹1 was being spent per person in Uttar Pradesh for
health care. In Tamil Nadu
this number was double. If we talk about even today, Tamil
Nadu is at the second rank on the Niti Aayog's Health Index,
whereas Uttar Pradesh is much
lower. Now thankfully, the situation in Uttar Pradesh is
definitely changing a bit, for example,
according to the latest ASER report, the reading skills of the
students of Uttar Pradesh have almost
doubled. The same is the case with math skills. Has the
government's policy changed?
In 2017, the state government announced that it will
transform the schools of the state through Operation Kaya Kalp. Apart from this, they
also fixed the teacher crisis of the state.
About 5 lakh new teachers were recruited.
A digital dashboard was created to
track the performance of students and teachers. Look, improvement is taking place,
but the road is still very long. I would like to
remind you that the
improvement that we have seen in Uttar Pradesh
in reading skills, which has now reached 28,
means that  That at 28, class three
students can read class two tax.
This number should be 100% but right now it is
only 28. Now I want to talk
about two states. These are very big success
stories which we all should know about.
Now we know that
in terms of NSDP, Maharashtra is the richest state in our country, but on per
capita basis, which
state is it? Neither Maharashtra, nor Gujarat, nor
Tamil Nadu? That is Sikkim. 40 years ago, per
capita income of Sikkim was less than our national
average, but in the last 20 years,
Sikkim has left all the states behind. So
what did Sikkim do?
In 2003, the Sikkim government took an important
decision where they
made their agriculture 100% organic, that is,
no fertilizers and no
pesticides. It is a
matter of pride and glory for all of us Indians that this small state of India,
Sikkim, has become a completely divine state.
Because of this, the agricultural sector there has improved.
Productivity increased, like a farmer says
that his yield has doubled or tripled,
but actually this organic agriculture
was just an excuse, because of it many other things happened
which increased the economy of Sikkim, like when
food processing industries came there, Sikkim was not
just selling raw turmeric or ginger,
but the processing centers there
started selling powders and spices, then
tourism increased in Sikkim due to this organic tax,
Sikkim marketed itself
that look we are an organic paradise, due to which
many tourists came here, apart from this, the
government gave many subsidies to the pharmaceutical sector
so that companies could be set up there
and today many major corporations are now in Sikkim,
one such state which has made a
lot of progress in the last 20-30 years is Odisha, Odisha
can become such a state in our country which has a trillion dollar economy,
this was said by Sajjan Jindal, who is the
managing director of JSW Steel, 60 years
ago no one could believe his words
because at that time Odisha was the most prosperous state in our country.  It
was one of the poorest states and
Orissa also adopted the same strategy that Tamil Nadu,
Gujarat and Maharashtra had adopted.
They
focused on other sectors instead of agriculture. After liberalization,
Chief Minister Biju Patnaik
used the resources of Orissa and built steel plants, power
plants and refineries.
In infrastructure, Biju Expressway
Project and Port Modernization
Project were started to help companies
and all this was possible
only because of strong political leadership. That is why, at
a time when many lives were lost due to natural disasters
in Orissa, today
disaster management of Orissa has become a success story.
Orissa has adopted a zero casualty
approach which has become a global example
in cyclone preparedness. And see,
such things give confidence to businesses
that the government will help us if there is
any problem and Orissa is
getting the same benefit. A line is
said about India that hope fully we become rich.
Before we become old, our country needs to
become rich before it grows old, which means
we don't have much time. And the
states like Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu are
doing well, but that doesn't mean
they can relax. If we
talk about Maharashtra, there are some areas
where the on average NSDP is more than ₹ 5 lakh, but there are
many districts
where the poor farmers are suffering.
Gujarat's per capita income is high, but
if we talk about social indicators, it is lagging
behind Bengal. Tamil Nadu is
doing very well in manufacturing,
but we are far behind in comparison to South East Asia.
One of the major reasons behind this is
that there is no good training for blue collar workers in our country. In
Vietnam, China,
Australia, US, there is
good training for plumbers or electricians,
and these are respected jobs, but
in our country, we believe that there are absolutely no
jobs. So this video was my attempt to
focus on the economy because the
event is about how much money people
have.  And this will happen only when our policy
makers pay attention to these things